have you ever talked about alcohol with
someone
who just fundamentally
could not apprehend could not sympathize
with could not relate to
your reasons for sobriety
the last time i had a conversation like
this it was with a spanish guy born and
raised in spain spanish is a first
language
and
you know i wasn't preaching i was
sitting around with a whole kind of
circle of tourists and all kind of
chit-chatting as equals it was one of
the nice things about living in thailand
laos and cambodia had some face-to-face
discussions that kind of those days that
uh i don't know now that the internet
has devoured the real world maybe it's
become scarce
and i remember you know he asked me for
whatever reason he said oh when did you
when did you stop drinking i think you
might have asked just because he noticed
i was the only person at the table who
wasn't freaking alcohol and i said look
man you know my days of drinking alcohol
is like 16 17 18 you know basically my
whole adult life i haven't drank alcohol
and his whole way of responding to that
he had this deep-seated conviction that
alcohol is good
being drunk all the time is good or
enjoying being tipsy as often as
possible is good and the only possible
reason the only possible explanation for
why i'm refusing to drink alcohol now
is that i enjoy it too much
and that i can't let myself
drink alcohol right
and you know i wasn't preaching to this
guy you know it was just
it's just one of those funny things that
happens life frankly i think if i were a
less intimidating person people would
try to push me around and get me to
drink alcohol more often
i mean
and it's like
how can i communicate to you
that i do not perceive alcohol
as delicious
i do not perceive drinking alcohol
as enjoyable i do not perceive that
altered state of mind
as something i yearn for or something i
can barely restrain myself from
indulging in to excess what you describe
as the most desirable thing in your day
in your week in your month in your
vacation because we're having this
conversation while he was on vacation
and he was getting drunk every day
that
is as appealing to me
as a pile of
seasoned with human
vomit
it's actually disgusting to me it's
actually repugnant what you enjoy
drinking
is something i
hate in the same way
that you might refuse to drink
camel urine
nothing of anything has camels
and you know
most people in your life
they will just never get it they will
just never be able to examine
the extent to which the things they find
desirable
are from another person's perspective
repugnant
and it's for real reasons
you know there are really substantive
meaningful reasons why
what you find
delicious delightful entertaining
rewarding about
drinking alcohol and the drunkenness
that ensues
why it is that i find that repugnant
some of you might have had that
experience with a with a grandmother
someone like that maybe when you go to
christmas there oh oh come now have a
drink oh join in the singing join in the
dancing
and you know you're not going to preach
to your own grandmother or maybe you're
only going to preach to her a little bit
you got you've got some brothers you're
not going to tell your grandmother
no no grandma
this this thing that's been giving you
brain damage your whole life this thing
that's been giving you liver damage and
maybe this thing that actually put
several of your blood relatives
into the hospital
into an early grave oh oh yeah i
actually hate and despise that and i
kind of look down my nose at you because
you haven't figured it out you know yeah
grandma yeah you know what actually
i have contempt for this drug habit
you've got and i kind of have contempt
for you as a drug addict um well no
you're probably not gonna explain it to
your grandmother
that way and i've been to family events
where
various people were in various stages of
mourning for people whose lives had been
ended by alcohol whether that was the
combination of alcohol and driving a car
or just direct death
you know
caused by alcohol
you have a sort of cultural discourse
that's based on the presumption that
something is desirable and then we're
just gonna debate the extent to which we
will discipline ourselves to minimize
how much of it we're gonna indulge in
or we're gonna be moderate we're gonna
moderate
our indulgence right and i'm radically
overturning that by really saying no
what's desirable to you is repugnant to
me i don't have to discipline myself i
don't have to limit myself
right
i'm revolted by
what you desire
so i got an email from a long time
viewer of the channel and this guy i
think he's been watching my videos for
five years maybe more
he's been writing to me asking for
advice
for many years sometimes practical
um
specific decisions he's making his own
life sometimes more profound
general advice and in this video
a lot of
aspects of my philosophy
that have come up in passing
things i've commented on obliquely and
sometimes even implicitly will here
instead be made tremendously blunt and
direct and a lot of kind of little
fragments will be brought together into
one
corpus
and if you've never seen the channel
before
you don't need any of that background
from your scumbag but the reason i
mentioned that this guy watched so many
of my videos over so many years
is that i wonder if in writing to me
this way
i wonder if he knows
you know on a gut level if there's some
level of which he knows what i'm going
to say to him
or if he has no idea
maybe he won't see this video coming so
to speak
um
and he's writing me about issues that
have come up amongst my viewers
again and again
and i say that with no
contempt for any of you i think there's
a reason why the type of person
who wrestles with these issues
would be watching my channel and
donating to support me on patreon and
asking me these
uh kinds of questions okay
um so i'm gonna start in the middle of
the email and i'll go back and read the
part of the beginning in just just a
moment it's not too long an email
but he says that he worries about
unnecessary spending
on activities such as eating out in
restaurants and buying fancy clothes
i've made so many videos talking for so
many hours do i ever use that comment
kind of terminology that kind of
verbiage do i talk about
necessary
and unnecessary
you might not have noticed that or you
might have picked out that sometimes i i
really do
target these kinds of claims the same
way i talk about the distinction between
natural and unnatural and good and evil
you know what's necessary and
unnecessary
that's a decision made up in your own
mind
right
there is no
definition of what's necessary
you can survive
on nothing but
white rice
yellow lentils and a vitamin pill
every day
take a multivitamin pill
white rice yellow lentils your total
food cost will be about 300
per annum
you know what is
necessary
you know i would never talk about eating
in a restaurant this way in terms of
decision made about necessity now it's
i'm just pointing out there's something
implicit there right and and now i'm
wondering
why is he writing to me about this what
is it he's wanting to hear from me or
maybe what is it what is it that he's
kind of apprehensive about you know what
i mean like maybe he's worried about
what i'm going to tell him about this
maybe he's writing to me and he's
worried i'm going to tell him to stop
making excuses and never eat a
restaurant again in his life no i'm not
that's not hawaii it's not our response
right
so he says he's worried about
unnecessary spending such as eating out
in restaurants and buying fancy clothes
he asks how can he reconcile using money
in this sort of unnecessary way when so
many people in the world
have so little okay so look it's a
sincere
well-intended question
you know what i mean
but
the most fundamental part of my answer
is there's more to talk about in this
email you know
i don't want
to go skiing
right it's not something i want to do
with my money it's not something i want
to do with my time i don't have to i
don't have to restrain myself prevent
myself from going skiing i don't want
to go gambling
at a casino when i was in las vegas
nevada with my girlfriend
you know we were basically there to save
money on airplane tickets this is a long
story short i i found it really kind of
emotionally upsetting and disturbing to
walk through the casinos and see the
reality of what was going on there just
to witness it for a few moments you know
we walked through
pretty quick but we did walk through the
gambling halls of several of these
um
casinos okay i'm not
restraining myself i'm not disciplining
myself i'm not minimizing my indulgence
and not seeking out a moderate path and
i'm not questioning
you know to what extent is it necessary
for me to go gambling or go skiing to
indulge in this way i'm not
counterposing that
to the fate of the poor people of the
world as if
by gambling or by going skiing i'm
actually stealing something from someone
else that i'm depriving someone else of
a meal so that i can go
gambling or go skiing
right
i actually
hate gambling
and i hate many other things about the
casino you guys know i'm not a
conventional feminist but i am an
unconventional feminist i find the
treatment of women and those casinos
denigrating and disturbing the
half-naked
women who are in all kinds of peculiar
jobs in and around the casinos and
promoting events in las vegas and by the
way you can see my videos i have a very
nuanced position on pornography and
prostitution and all these things i'm
not some simplistic sex negative person
but there are a lot of things aside from
the gambling i find immoral and
disturbing about the casinos okay
i i actively reject i actively repudiate
gambling i actively repudiate skiing all
right to me
this is a pizza
all right
now i don't know when i will next go
back to france
i don't know
uh a huge percentage
of all the money i earned in the last 10
years
was spent visiting my daughter in france
and it's possible this will happen again
within the next year within the next two
years
maybe not for another five years we
don't know i'm employing a lawyer
right now if you want to talk about
necessary you want to talk about
necessary versus unnecessary how what
would be
how is this even a meaningful term to
apply you see and you see why i don't
reason things through this way
is it a necessary expense
for me to fly before it initially was to
fly from china to paris and then take a
train
from paris to the cote d'azur to spend
just a few days with my daughter is that
necessary an unbelievable amount of
money if you add up all four trips just
the trains and
planes and so on right you know what i i
suggested to my mother
that the next time we go to france at
some point in the future we go to a
unique museum that exists in france
that's devoted to the history of the
french revolution okay i know a lot
about the french revolution that
particular history i don't know if this
could be combined with visiting my
daughter or not i don't know okay
i'm using this museum rather than
some of the examples you've heard on my
channel before someone's talking about
going to visit the pyramids i don't know
if you want to go visit some ancient
buddhist temple or something okay but
this is this is a very explicitly
educational experience
it's a museum
in france dedicated to the history of
the french revolution
and i actually went there with my mother
when i was almost a toddler i could walk
but barely i was a little a little tight
and i have memories from that journey
even though i was so young i don't think
i'd started kindergarten yet and we
could figure out exactly what year that
was when i was a little tiny kid i went
there so that's it's something
meaningful
linking me to my mother and linking me
to my childhood and the history and
political philosophy of the french
revolution has been with me my my whole
life
is it necessary
for me to go and see that museum and see
it with my mother and learn something
and you know partly i'll learn something
new but obviously going to the museum
mostly
i will be rehearsing knowledge i've
already learned i've already read a lot
about the history of the french but you
know probably reinforcing and
illustrating things are you know adding
detail to things
nobody's even going to question it
because we're not talking about
something evil
right
we only think in this way about
moderation and
necessity we're talking about
necessary evil we're talking about a
moderate amount of people moderate
drinking of alcohol moderate brain
damage
moderate
gambling right that's what the discourse
is implicitly about like on a deep level
i feel like there's a
an asymmetry between the two sides here
that's the same as that asymmetry i
described to myself and the spanish guy
who i met there's actually in
northwestern laos in the middle of
nowhere
sitting around talking with these with
these tourists it's like i don't think i
can get you to understand
what alcohol means to me and it doesn't
mean to me what it what it what it means
to you
right
um
[Music]
and this strange sense of
meaninglessness
of
necessity
buying a book isn't necessary reading a
book isn't necessary right
why would necessity
be the criterion we hold up to any of
these questions what we're talking about
is good and evil right
is it good to go gambling in las vegas
nevada is it good to spend a moderate
amount of money gambling in las vegas
nevada
i believe
the answer to that question is in no way
reciprocal with
the question of whether or not you would
take the money and give it to a charity
to feed starving people
if you did not go gambling like
the question of whether gambling or
skiing or drinking alcohol is a good use
of your time and money that has to be
settled in and of itself you have to
take up your own position you have to
come up with your own conclusions on
that
and it is neither going to be justified
nor condemned because hypothetically the
money that could be spent gambling could
be spent drinking alcohol could be spent
eating a fancy restaurant that instead
that hypothetically could
feed
a poor starving person right we're
making judgments about good and evil and
as i've said in numerous videos from
numerous angles the ultimate question
is of what kind of person you want to
become
right
now
you know
it's very painful but
yeah i was deeply committed to wanting
to be
you know
a meaningful part of my own daughter's
life i spent so much money it was one
trip where i only saw her for i think
two hours it was one hour i flew from
canada to germany i saw this is the
video of it
i honestly forget it was one hour or two
hours this very short visit that i
crossed the ocean for i spent i spent
all the money i had in the world and
it's been at that time i very very
little money to my name um you know
you're making this enormous sacrifice
and you don't even know if this kid is
gonna remember it you know what i mean
um okay
you know
that's who i want to be i want to do the
right thing just because it's the right
thing to do
and by the way in making that trip my
ex-wife
lied to me and attempted to blackmail me
and
she lied to me and said she was going to
report me to the police and i actually
went to the police station she didn't
even she said she reported me to the
police and i went and talked to the
police and it wasn't true there was all
this you know unbelievable drama and
what what she was trying to blackmail me
into she wanted me to sign paperwork
giving up the right to spend time with
my own daughter
i was like blackmail doesn't work this
way
you can't anyway you can't force me to
sign a paper
giving up exactly the thing i want to
get like you have to give up one thing
in order to get another thing it can't
be
it can't be that you promise me that
you'll let me see my daughter if i sign
this paper giving up my legal right to
say my daughter
black male doesn't worthwhile really
nasty terrible situation okay all right
but you know what we get into a lot of
other more difficult questions about
good and evil good and bad
and what kind of person you want to
become was it necessary for me to go to
cambodia was it necessary for me to go
to a house no there's no necessity
and you know you what are you going say
the the money i spent
on an airplane ticket for me to go to
cambodia and pursue humanitarian work
and try to make the world a better place
humanitarian work research learning
languages all this stuff oh well in
theory that could have provided so many
sacks of rice for so many starving
people
no
there are questions here of good and
evil and if you are doing something
good you actually positively think it's
good these questions wouldn't even arise
in your mind's eye right you say oh yeah
no this is something really meaningful
and positive i want to do in cambodia
and it's good for me like i'm going to
become a better person cambodia is going
to become a better place the world's
going to become a better place
um
and then you know there are pragmatic
costs there are probably questions of to
what extent the cost can be justified by
um by how much good you're gonna you're
gonna get out of it right so you already
have a hint that you're asking the wrong
questions or you're evaluating the
problem in the wrong way when you're
thinking in terms of
moderation and minimization
because whatever you're talking about
moderating whatever you're talking about
minimizing is evil okay
and on a deeper level
we're about to hear it just the next
paragraph this email his assumption is
that whatever you are doing
with your money
kind of exists in the shadow of this
potential you have
to give away your money to charity and
the charity is going to do something
with that money far better than anything
you could do for yourself or others and
that is a delusion and it's one i think
my whole philosophy has been
perhaps too subtly
uh set against so far on this youtube
channel
i do see your questions coming in guys
but as you can see i am i am trying to
answer this question from supporter on
patreon if you have a second hit the
thumbs up button it'll help more people
discover the stream uh while this is
still ongoing yes uh we have a question
of what does isil think of marijuana and
several people in the audience already
know
i just say you know um
you can look up the list of my videos in
the past you just hit control f on your
keyboard hit find on your keyboard
and uh you can look at the different
videos i've made specifically about
marijuana
obviously that's an example of a keyword
that's very very easy to search for in
that list some other topics it's a bit
more nuanced because there's more than
one way to say it what have you
um
okay so he says that when he looked up
this issue on the internet all the
results were people talking about their
anxiety over their personal poverty
whereas i might add his anxiety seems to
be about his personal wealth
going to fancy restaurants and buying
fancy clothes apparently
he says this this is of course a thought
experiment but i still ponder on it
myself even though i will continue to
eat out at fancy restaurants and buy
fancy clothes
period
moderation is perhaps the way
setting aside a moderate amount for
charity is good and buying some nice
stuff is too
period so i really just wonder
why is he saying this to me
i think if he said the same thing to his
mother to his father to his work
colleagues to friends there are such a
huge percentage of people you would say
this to would just unthinkingly nod and
agree with you in our culture or in our
century
but i wonder if on some level
he apprehends or anticipates that i am
that incredibly rare person who is going
to disagree with him root and branch i'm
going to reject this quite fundamentally
all right now i just point out
in a subtle way you may not have noticed
this on my channel i have been
constantly undermining this concept of
charity i have been constantly
challenging it i have been constantly
invalidating it
um
i talk a lot about charity i talk a lot
about charity work i talk a lot about
the aspiration to make the world a
better place i talk about the way in
which
personal altruism can be educational for
the altruists that you can gain a lot
you can learn a lot by going out and
making the world a better place and have
contrasted charity of this kind of very
hands-on personally involved charity to
the unbelievable lives of passivity and
self-indulgence of many of my fellow
youtubers who are addicted to video
games and and what have you but have you
ever once
heard me say
hey guys giving money to this charity is
a great idea there have been so many
different charities analyzed on this
channel including charities that claim
to represent causes or that actually do
represent causes that i sympathize with
vegan charities we went through a
detailed discussion of quite a few
different vegan charities asked the
question where does your money go what
difference does it make i have never
once said to you donating money to this
charity is a good idea okay you can
remember also my discussion repeated
discussions of the black lives matter
movement
i've heard a lot of people uh just this
week
um
saying that they're so glad
they never gave money to black lives
matter
i've been listening to the latest round
of kind of recrimination and analysis of
where did the money go
90 million dollars why is there so
little to show for it
why did some of the leaders of the
movement become wealthy and so little
was accomplished in so many years so
many millions of dollars and i've heard
a bunch of different black americans
saying
they're so glad they never gave a dime
to this organization black lives matter
i've never heard anyone say that they
regret
that they missed the opportunity to
donate money
gee i i sure wish my 5 000 were added
onto that pile of of millions of dollars
that have in this way um disappeared so
you know
i've offered you guys a critique of
charity again and again and again
from many different angles
um
you have never heard me once say
anything like what are you saying here
quote setting aside a moderate amount of
your income for charity is good
okay i have never said charity is good
as that's ridiculous and i never would
say anything like that i've challenged
you again and again to think about what
charity really means
now
you know
[Music]
some people
are so mentally disabled
that they can't help anyone
not even themselves
okay
some people are so totally lacking in
their own
judgment their own ability to do
research
their own ability to have initiative
that they have to
pay someone else
to go out and make the world a better
place is that your situation
really
like whatever the cause is we're talking
about
you really think
you should hand your money over to
someone else
who should go and do that
instead of you
rolling up your sleeves
to make that difference and i've got to
tell you something i don't believe you
all right like the fact that you're
capable of writing this email to me
means i don't believe you
whatever this guy's situation is i have
no idea how much your little money has
okay you know
syria has been going on since 2011 or so
syrian civil war
i'm not saying you can go every year i'm
not saying you can uh
you know devote
your whole life to it or you know
in the space of the last 10 years
you could have made two or three trips
to syria you could have used your own
money you could have started your own
foundation or your own agency you could
have as one single individual made a
difference in people's lives with no
intermediary organization no
bureaucracy
so on and so forth it would have meant
more to you it would have meant more to
the people you helped
you know what have you got you got five
thousand bucks ten thousand bucks fifty
thousand i want you to be got
however much or how little
you know even with an example as
daunting
as the syrian civil war all right
the difference you could make directly
it'll mean more to you it'll mean more
to others and you'll stand to learn a
great deal more as opposed to
taking that money
putting in an envelope and handing it to
what's basically a faceless corporation
from one of the better term handing it
to a charity
and there are you know
on my channel again and again and again
there has been this critique of the
charity sector of the charity industry
of what's wrong with it
what's wrong with peta what's wrong with
people for the ethical treatment of
animals
it's wrong with 99
of charities
like i'm tempted to just say it's 100
but there's a different criterion to
bring to bear here even if there are one
percent of charities that will make
really excellent use of your money that
aren't like capeta
what if instead of comparing the charity
to you wasting your money gambling or
you wasting your money skiing etc what
if instead we're comparing you paying
someone else to do something virtuous to
you
doing it yourself
all right
what kind of belief
do you have about yourself you see what
i'm saying here
what kind of belief do you lack or what
kind of belief do you
want to put it
what is your judgment on your own
character are you such a worthless
person are you such a stupid person are
you such a weak person that you can't
help anyone that you can't make any
difference in the world with your own
two hands and apparently your
your thousands of dollars again it's not
going to be every day it's not going to
be every month maybe during the span of
10 years
in syria
[Music]
however
any given decade for any given conflict
or any given crisis
maybe there are just one or two points
at which you personally can get involved
but trust me whether you went for two
weeks or two months
you'd remember that for the rest of your
life
you know and you might you know you
might be able to help people that you
would then have
uh some kind of meaningful connection
with for the rest of your life and maybe
not
maybe you you'd hate and resent all the
people you worked with maybe you'd come
back um with a much darker
view of human nature after having
terrible experiences being in the
charity industry which
i had myself
um but at least that would be a learning
experience that you that you did indeed
uh have yourself that would be something
invaluable you would have bought
yourself something of great worth
uh with your donations to charity in
that sense
all right
um
okay so i think i'm now going to read
this uh sort of from start to start to
finish so you'll see the contacts going
back to the start of the
email
he introduces himself i remember him
blah blah blah
he then says regarding human capacity
for example one could live an
intellectual life which has no impact on
anyone else financially which would
limit
their ability to have a positive impact
on the world but it would still be an
enriching life researching and writing
research papers
how would
how would one reconcile having this life
knowing that a high paid job would
include higher tax revenue for the
country's benefit
and a higher possibility of using your
own money to do good in the world also
so that's the first part of his question
before what i what i read you before
okay
so
do you know anyone
who's ever had to make this decision
do you know
anyone
who was working as a dentist and said to
you well they earn a lot of money
working as a dentist but they really
feel
they're stifling
their own ability to make the world a
better place
to what they could accomplish writing
research papers
what they could accomplish
as an intellectual
that's your
that's your example is writing research
papers so that's why i'm sticking with
that example
in your whole life
do you think you'll meet even one person
for whom that's a choice
for whom that's a conflict
and even if you did meet that one person
if you met someone who told you that
do you think you would suspect that
they're delusional
like this guy's a dentist and he has
this delusion that he's a great
intellectual who could really make a
difference in the world through his
research papers through writing research
okay
the value of that intellectual life
for the tiny minority of people who have
the option to live it
is so extraordinary
that nobody would trade it to work as a
dentist
and nobody would justify being a dentist
because they would have the opportunity
to pay a higher rate of taxes
right
for the tiny tiny minority of people
who have that choice to make
right those are precisely the people
who cannot be bought
who cannot be bribed
because they know
the value of their unique intellectual
potential whether they think of that in
terms of research
in terms of creative writing and
whatever form of intellectual activity
it is could never be compared to
this model you have of a life of
drudgery earning money and donating to
charity now again these delusions are
linked and reciprocal
your vision that earning money is
meaningful
is in this way linked to your
deep-seated assumptions about charity as
a positive part of your meaningful life
and what you're describing as charity
i see instead as a saddening sickening
judgment that you're passing on yourself
that you are someone who is so
intellectually disabled
that you have to hand that money over to
someone else who can make those
decisions for you who can do that
research for you who can make that
difference in the world for you
now sorry i was using syria off the top
of my head as an example and i've talked
about cambodia i alluded to cambodia and
laos briefly but you guys all know the
vast majority of charity work it's it's
in your own country you know it's in
your own language there are
opportunities all the time to make the
world a better place right that rely on
your initiative
your ingenuity
your intelligence your honesty
your integrity
right and you can even ask other people
for donations
you can say oh yeah you know right now
there's a hurricane there's a disaster
and some people need help and oh yeah so
i've got a few thousand bucks i'm gonna
go down in my truck
and you know what if i need to buy some
other stuff i'm gonna take photographs
of how much it costs i'll post the
receipt on instagram and hey if you 10
guys if you guys can all throw in a
couple thousand bucks i can buy a few
more tents and mattresses or whatever it
is right
there are there's a way for you
to make a difference and you know what
you might get ripped off
you might get swindled you might get
lied to big big corporate charities do
also in case you didn't know all the
time you just wouldn't learn anything
from it you wouldn't hear anything back
about it right you know you might try to
help someone
and you know
you end up learning a harsh lesson about
human nature instead
right
um
and the other thing that's interesting
it's built into this question is you say
for example one could live an
intellectual life which has no impact on
anyone else
financially
i
[Laughter]
i don't think anyone is measuring the
value
of their intellectual life in terms of
its financial
impact on others
right
if you are going to be the person who
does research revealing that the water
coming out of everyone's taps
is poisonous
you don't measure the value of that
research financially right
whether it's a book you publish a
research paper whether it's you know
um
there are all kinds of intellectual
things people do that are either
creative or destructive either
implicitly or explicitly political some
kind of attempt to change the world to
challenge yourself to grow to challenge
other people to grow
you know
you know sorry in a lot of these
countries too at the united states one
of the saddest kind of um
one of the one of the most pathetic
forms of charity of course is raising
money for court cases
okay you want to go fight
about the future of circumcision in the
supreme court
you know
you want to
put the money together and hire lawyers
and dispute whether or not parents have
the right to
you know cut off part of a newborn
infant's body
you know and
change his life forever and so on and so
forth you know
does anyone evaluate that in terms of
its financial
uh impact on others
okay so then caught up to where i was
before
in reading his question he says this is
of course uh just a thought experiment
but he still ponders on it himself even
though he continues to eat out in fancy
restaurants and buy fancy clothes
moderation is perhaps the way setting
aside a moderate amount for charity is
good and buying some nice stuff is too
if one wants to dedicate their life to
study and education without much
financial freedom
then it is an individual's right to
pursue happiness and ignore the fact
that they could do this or that
but i'm afraid to say this question over
personal spending has been a prolonged
thought that i'm not expecting to go
away
my life has been in flux as has ever
once
due to the conditions the year 2020 and
which is maybe why i think deeply about
such things in between the fog and the
desolation so you can see this is a
sincere well-intentioned uh message
right
the beloved is some pardon me
the above
is something only rich nations have to
contend with although most people
probably ignore such thoughts as much as
possible as they see that capitalism is
generally working there's an incredible
expansion of wealth across the world the
people in former ages like the roman
empire would never have dreamed of
and he says nobody even talks about the
incredible progress of human welfare
over the last 50 years or even the last
20 years
um
many years ago on this channel i talked
about these issues from a very different
perspective from a very different point
of view because i had a lot of viewers
in the channel now
five years ago more than five years ago
i remember talking about in the airport
when i was leaving to go to thailand
from victoria canada
i had a lot of care
viewers who were really attached to this
notion of
uh minimalism
where they saw themselves as subtracting
from the planet's welfare that anything
they do anything they eat anything they
buy anything they own anything they use
is
you know being stolen being subtracted
from some greater some
sum
of the world's welfare
that this was a harm they had to
apologize for or had to justify and what
i tried to point out again and again is
no
your life
is something positive your ambitions
your aspirations are something positive
that you don't have to justify this
sense of subtraction and of having to
minimize the harm done only makes sense
when we're talking about harm it only
makes sense when we're talking about
something you're ashamed of it only
something bad and evil and wrong now
if you are going to las vegas to go
gambling and drink alcohol and use drugs
and sleep with prostitutes i understand
why you might take a harm reduction view
of this say well you're going to try to
minimize the amount of time you lose
minimize the amount of money you lose
why you might be minimizing something
that you are ashamed of why you might
look at all of these habits whether it's
the alcohol the gambling the
prostitution or what have you said oh
well these are things you have to
struggle to do in in moderation
right
this is why i want to come back to the
concept of charity right
nobody talks about charity in moderation
nobody talks about charity as something
you have to minimize right nobody has
ever said to me don't you feel bad
about the airplane fuel that was burned
when you were flying to cambodia to do a
combination of humanitarian work and
research
you know
no of course i don't feel bad
now
i said this many years ago said very
briefly now
maybe you've heard that maybe this is
familiar to some of you if you heard it
all those years ago on my my youtube
channel you know if you believe that a
war is worth fighting and a war is worth
winning
you would not trouble yourself about how
much gasoline is being burned being
wasted being used up
in order to transport soldiers across
the ocean to fight that war it's
precisely when the war is something
you're ashamed of something evil
something you're morally opposed to that
you then talk in this way about
minimizing or moderating the impacts or
the waste you know caused by the war if
you believe
that the united states of america should
put 110 percent of its effort into
defeating
the nazis in germany
whatever example you want to use of
course of course you would see the
burning of fossil fuels the use of jet
fuel of of airplanes as justified
for that purpose toward that end it
would just seem laughably ridiculous to
to question in the sense the efficiency
of the war or how to minimize the war it
would be ridiculous to say well couldn't
we save a lot of jet fuel
if we fought the war
half as hard for twice as many years
this is a notion of efficiency that's
irrelevant to war and it's irrelevant to
charity it's irrelevant to anything
you're you're undertaking
so when i look at these kinds of
questions
what i see is a
complex struggle
of someone
who doesn't want to face up to the
extent to which really what they're
doing is making judgments about good and
evil right
so now we have a four-way grid
there are things that are good
that i perceive as good and i feel good
about
there are things that are evil
that i perceive as evil and i therefore
find repulsive and repellent and i'm not
tempted by
right so for me
that's alcohol who said the start of
this video i've known i don't yearn for
alcohol i don't restrain myself i don't
discipline myself i don't moderate it i
perceive alcohol as something bad and
therefore i want absolutely none of it
in my life right i just don't want to be
a part of my life in any way okay
there are things that are good
but i have to admit to myself i can't
perceive them as good i can't feel good
about them i can't feel positively
motivated to do them and that's
complicated
okay
and then there are things that are bad
and i know them to be bad i know them to
be evil
but i can't perceive them to be bad i
can't perceive them to be evil i can't
feel
repulsed by them i can't feel revolted
by them
right i still feel drawn to them you
still feel tempted you still feel
this is something for whatever reason
you want to do
okay
um
[Music]
these judgments will absolutely never uh
be based on
the notion that you could substitute
one thing for another right because
moral judgments aren't
aren't substitutable
right
i don't i don't want to gross you guys
out
uh
with examples um
[Music]
there are circumstances
in which
you may make the decision that you will
refuse to do an evil act
knowing full well
that another man
will do that act instead of you
after you next to you
and many people will look at that and
say well you you might as well
do it anyway
no
because one man can't be substituted for
another man one decision can't be
substituted for another decision not
when it's questions of
of right and wrong
all right if you have made the decision
and
by the same token
you're never going to be able to
minimize something good
or something bad you can't exaggerate
the good or minimize the bad you can't
change the significance or scale of
these things by pointing out what you
could have done with the same time which
you could have done with the same money
anyway ethical decisions are only and
always directed towards things that are
actual not
uh
hypothetical okay
so
look
you know
if you want to write a book
these are questions we really deal with
in our real lives okay
you may be a parent
who is
looking at the reality of the fact that
you will neglect your own son you will
neglect your own daughter
if you take the time to write a book
and you have to make a hard choice is it
worth it
i've got to tell you something if i was
in a situation where i was raising my
own daughter i know my own values i
wouldn't be writing this book
the book i'm writing right now is 100 a
product of the french legal system the
french the slowness of the french
divorce courts etc etc you know what i'm
saying
um but you know i do understand that i
mean he was talking about a research
project i do understand there are some
people who are working on the cure for
cancer or whatever it is and they say
okay you know there's something positive
about raising my own child and there's
something about writing this book
getting this research done you know uh
so on and so forth you know where they
feel committed to to pursuing that
outcome
um
but wouldn't it be ridiculous to try to
judge the value of that book
by comparing it to the neglected role of
parenting how much it would have
mattered how much it would have meant
for the writer to instead spend time
raising his own son raising his own
daughter or vice versa
to judge your own child
to judge the value of the parenting
you've done saying just think of the
book i could have written all right now
people do torment themselves with these
notions they do i think people drive
themselves insane with them but these
are really strictly speaking in
principle
insane okay
there are different reasons for eating
in a fancy restaurant i don't know yours
you know i don't know
okay
some men eat in a fancy restaurant in
order to impress a woman or the fancy
restaurant you know for all kinds of
frankly cruel and venal reasons there i
know it's going to sound ridiculous
there are bad reasons to use in fancy
restaurants you know what i mean this
this could be something that in your
case it's really quite dark and it could
be i mean one of the times i eat in
restaurants is when i'm in airports it
could be look if i'm going to make this
journey i've got to go find the vegan
option and eat in these restaurants i've
got to scrape by this way i just bought
a bunch of vegan power bars because i
was assuming i was going to classes on
university campus
didn't work out
i've got to make those decisions where
it's like you know i can't eat a proper
meal i've got to do i've got to do this
for that reason
is it worth it you've got it you've got
to make those you've got to make those
decisions but i think you know
if you really thought it was bad
to eat in this restaurant
you wouldn't enjoy it any more than i
would enjoy drinking alcohol or i would
enjoy gambling if you really think this
is bad and evil and wrong don't kid
yourself you would find this repugnant
and there's all kinds of
self-indulgence it's all kinds of you
know wastes of time and waste of money
that i do find repugnant that i do find
repellent so again most people don't
think skiing is a big deal i really do
you know what i mean i don't think i
don't think it's suitable for for an
adult to spend their time or money or
energy even going skiing even that i'm
i'm willing to look down my nose at you
know what i mean um
i i think that very simply
this complexity you've brought to this
question and you're struggling why it is
you're writing to me um asking for an
answer it's all going to disappear if
you can just admit to yourself um what
the role of good and evil is in these
decisions that you're making
um
[Music]
if you think
that it is good
to be a dentist to become a dentist and
earn a lot of money and have no time and
maybe snuff out your intellectual
potential vaguely alluded to here do
something more more positive in the
world if you really think that's good
you wouldn't be asking me this question
and on the other hand if you really
thought you had the potential to make a
difference in this world
intellectually if you thought that you
had the potential to make a difference
in this world through charity charity of
any kind charity with your own hands
with your own intelligence with your own
ingenuity with your own initiative you
wouldn't be asking me this question the
reality is that you're asking me this
question because you're not living a
life that's devoted to any kind of
intellectual activity you're not living
a life that's devoted to any kind of
charity you're not living a life that
you believe is making the world a better
place or that's making you a better
person you behold yourself as someone
who's spending all of your time and
money or too much of your time and money
on fancy clothes and fancy restaurants
and you're asking yourself how was that
that with these seemingly good
intentions it all could have gone so
terribly wrong
not entirely